Life Cycle Assessment of Waste Products of a Green‑Neighbourhood

Modeste Kameni Nematchoua1,2 · José A. Orosa3 · Sigrid Reiter2

Abstract

This research aims to quantify and to compare the effect of the energy mix of 150 countries on the waste products generated by an eco-neighbourhood. To perform this comparison, the same neighbourhood design is applied to in 150 countries, but four parameters are adapted to each country: energy mix, local climate, building materials and occupants’ mobility. The life cycle of the neighbourhood was assessed over 100 years. This environmental impact was evaluated by the Pleiades simula- tion software under four phases (construction, use, renovation, and demolition). Among the four local parameters (energy mix, local materials, climate, and transport), the energy mix has the most significant effect on the waste product emission. In this sense, the results showed that the most important quantity of waste products (35.3% of the total) is generated during the demolition phase. What is more, the application of photovoltaic panels in eco-neighbourhood increases up to 12% of the total waste product emission over 100 years. Globally, in the 150 Countries, 80% of waste products come mainly from building materials and domestics and the waste product emission per occupant was between 10 and 20% higher in developed coun- tries (USA, Japan, Canada, France, Germany, etc.) than in poor or developing countries (Madagascar, Cameroon, Vietnam, Haiti, Costa Rica, Afghanistan, etc.). Finally, the waste generation concentration of an occupant of an eco-neighbourhood was estimated to be around of 322 kg per year.

Graphical Abstract



Keywords Life cycle assessment · Waste products · Eco-neighbourhood · Countries

 Modeste Kameni Nematchoua kameni.modeste@yahoo.fr

1 Beneficiary of an AXA Research Fund Postdoctoral Grant, Research Leaders Fellowships, AXA SA, 25 Avenue Matignon, 75008 Paris, France

2 LEMA, ArGEnCo Department, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium

3 Department of N. S. and Marine

Engineering. E.T. S. N. Y M, University of A Coruña, Paseo de Ronda 51, 15011 A Coruña, Spain

# Statement of Novelty

Nowadays the effect of environmental pollution by multiple wastes released by humans is known. This waste directly affects human health and destroys the ecosystem. It will be better to conduct such studies on a global scale, to propose a common strategy to all countries. The majority of studies in the literature uses known models and apply them in the case of a specific region for the evaluation and reduction of waste

emitted into the environment. The case of waste analysis at the scale of a sustainable district has not yet been developed, much less on the scale of several regions. The behaviour of individuals varies from country to country. But a study of global sensitivity makes it possible to better understand the position of each country and to take joint decisions. Overall, it is recognized that one of the main objectives of environ- mental policies in each country is to integrate environmental sustainability into the economy and growth. But how to do it? Nowadays, politicians are wondering about issues related to the environment, and also to the different mechanisms of daily waste management.

# Introduction

Increasing urbanization has a significant impact on environ- mental degradation, with the emission of waste produced by humans. By 2050, according to the European Union [1], a minimum of 70% of the world's population should live in cities. This strong population growth expected in 2050 could accelerate the production of urban waste. For a long time, sustainable development policy has been recom- mended by many international organizations and applied in several countries. This policy in several of its articles recom- mended the total recycling of the waste emitted. Since 1990, the design of eco-neighbourhoods has steadily increased in many parts of the world, especially in developed countries. Several researchers have suggested that the implementation of sustainable neighbourhoods may be one of the solutions to reduce waste emission into the atmosphere. Housing policy has gradually given way to a climate policy, as it is now part of multiple approaches. So, political power, what- ever its level, can no longer be content today to program the creation of new neighbourhoods without striving to meet more needs as individual as well as collective, present and future. The quantity of waste released into the environment has increased considerably, following the strong mechaniza- tion and new technologies. Nowadays, waste management in the neighbourhoods or cities is becoming a major concern for both city officials and the occupants. The potential for recovery or processing of any product and material must be valued. Waste released in a neighbourhood can be a resource in agriculture [2]. The waste management is done by the chain: first inside houses, followed by neighbourhoods, and cities [3, 4]. Nematchoua and Reiter [5] explained that a sus- tainable neighbourhood incorporates, upstream of its design, many criteria, such as waste treatment through the selective collection of waste, sorting, recycling, composting, etc.

Overall, the economic impact of waste is mainly influ-

enced by food losses [6, 7]. According to environmental- ists, incineration with energy recovery and composting are among of best-recommended management waste method.

It is advisable to recycle the waste and use, the local non- industrial composting technique, which has no impact on the environment [8–11]. In Belgium, food accounts for 12% (15,000 tons) of trash contents per year [12]. Food waste has an impact on the entire cycle of the chain, from the producer to the consumer [13]. Indeed, 1 kg of food thrown at the end of the chain amounts to producing a much larger mass of waste linked to the cumulative loss, at each stage of produc- tion [14]. They explained that even though waste manage- ment techniques are established and mastered in developed countries, it continues to be a subject of concern in many countries. The European Union in its approach towards sustainable development had fixed several objectives such as: Reduce household waste thanks to the compost and the recycling of the materials. "Recovery" of 58% of packaging materials in the year 2000; and increase the use of recycled materials in aggregates from 35 million tons to 50 million tons in 2005 [15, 16].

Life cycle assessment (LCA) is the main method pro- viding more precise information on environmental impacts related to waste management. Indeed, this methodology facilitates the comparison of waste treatment channels [17]. LCA allows studying the effects of a product on the envi- ronment, human health and the different resources. Rod- ríguez et al. [18] proposed a model of Integrated Waste Management to optimize the collection and treatment of solid waste. They assessed the total cost of different types of environmental waste. The results showed the effective- ness of biological treatments compared to heat treatments. Finnveden [19] proposed different aspects of the life-cycle analysis of solid waste management systems and showed that these aspects condition optimal waste management. Studies conducted by Cherubini et al. [20] were applied on LCA of four waste management methods: biogas-free landfill, biogas landfill, waste sorting, and waste incineration. The results showed that the new waste treatment technology can limit the different environmental impacts, also, the energy pro- duced with waste can cover 15% of the total energy used in Rome. Winkler and Bilitewski [21] compared six models of waste optimization developed in Europe and America. The results showed a significant difference between the differ- ent models of waste life cycle analysis. After analysing five waste treatment strategies, Hong et al. [22] found that waste incineration has the highest potential for acidification, while, the discharge, has the highest potential for eutrophication and global warming potential. Yay [23] explained that LCA is the most recommended tool to help administrators’ better plan an integrated waste management approach that delivers highly reliable environmental results.

In 2020, Doaemo et al. [24] suggested 3 core waste man-

agement hierarchy systems to support sustainable develop- ment for Lae City by reviewing existing opportunities and challenges associated with the current municipal solid waste management system and the associated policies. The result shows that a zero waste campaign for resource recovery involving all stakeholders can be implemented since the organic content of municipal solid waste generated in Lae City reaches 70%. In addition, the discharge of municipal solid waste to the dedicated landfill site can be minimized if the policies are strengthened and the proposed way to avoid waste is strictly implemented. Baquero et al. [25] developed a methodology to estimate bio-waste generation at municipal level taking into account the characteristics of the region, the Municipal Solid Waste management applied, and different socio-economic variables that define the level of rurality of a municipality. A model to estimate the bio waste gen- eration for each type of municipality has been developed using Multiple Linear Regression Analysis. Significant influ- ence of socio-economic variables on bio-waste generation was observed for the rural municipalities.Roy and al. [26] evaluated the performance of the existing Solid Waste Man- agement system as an eco‐friendly component of Nirala, a planned residential area of Khulna city. When they were applying the TOPSIS method, a low level of community par- ticipation was found to be the reason behind the deplorable condition of the Waste Management system in Nirala city. In 2021, Colangelo et al.[27] assessed the environmental impacts coming from five mixtures of concrete, with simi- lar mechanical properties and workability, but with a differ- ent amount of recycled coarse aggregate and natural coarse aggregate (0–30–50–70–100%). The results showed that mixtures obtained by recycled coarse aggregates have better environmental impacts than the only one formed exclusively by natural coarse aggregates and results improve when the amount of recycled coarse aggregate is higher.

All these different researches [25–27] are very important,

however, they focus on the case study of a region. Nowa- days the effect of environmental pollution by multiple wastes released by humans is known. This waste directly affects human health and destroys the ecosystem. It will be better to conduct such studies on a global scale, to propose a com- mon strategy to all countries. The majority of studies in the literature uses known models and apply them in the case of a specific region for the evaluation and reduction of waste emitted into the environment. The case of waste analysis at the scale of a sustainable district has not yet been developed, much less on the scale of several regions. The behaviour of individuals varies from country to country. But a study of global sensitivity makes it possible to better understand the position of each country and to take joint decisions. Overall, it is recognized that one of the main objectives of environ- mental policies in each country is to integrate environmental sustainability into the economy and growth. But how to do it? Nowadays, politicians are wondering about issues related to the environment, and also to the different mechanisms of daily waste management. Decision-makers must assess the technical, environmental, and economic aspects of waste management. Environmental impact assessment (EIA) and inventory analysis are good examples of these techniques. Indeed, the life cycle assessments can provide a more in- depth framework, assess waste management strategies, and identify environmental impacts and hotspots regarding waste treatment hierarchy. This research can also help decision- makers understand the benefits associated with more effi- cient waste treatment. Various research gaps are detailed and presented for a reader review. As far as the authors are aware, no work of this type has been attempted in the past. Thus, the principal objective of this research is to analyse the impacts of the energy mix and Photovoltaic panels on the quantity of waste produced in an eco-neighbourhood. The different simulations details are given in the next paragraph.

# The research methodology

The environmental analysis of a sustainable neighbour- hood located in Belgium over 100 years was carried out and adopted the same design in 149 other countries while adapting four parameters specific to each country such as: energy mix, local climate, building materials and occupa- tional mobility.

Overall, this methodology is divided into four main sec- tions (a) neighbourhood selection and site modelling; (b) life cycle assessment (LCA) of the selected neighbourhood; (c) modelling the same neighbourhood in 149 other countries and to define the life cycle assessment; (d) to apply one sce- nario for mitigating the health damage.

In this sense, the methodological carried out in this research is based on the choice of the case study, the analysis of the environmental database and the environmental indica- tors, the use of LCA simulation software, and the improve- ment scenario tested.

## Initial analysis of the eco‑neighbourhood

The Sart-Tilman eco-neighbourhood in Liege is one of the privileged places of Belgium, where the concepts of a sustainable neighbourhood have been applied. This eco- neighbourhood offers different types of buildings (terraced and semi-detached houses, apartment buildings, etc.). A majority of the built surface is dedicated to housing, but it can be also found spaces dedicated to commercial functions or the liberal professions and small businesses. In all, it can be observed 40 small apartments, 45 larger homes, 11 single-family, duplex homes and 6 comple- mentary functions (businesses and shopping centres) and private parking spaces are planned near the buildings. All the dwellings located on the ground floor have a private garden.

In this neighbourhood, the buildings were designed with respect to the passive standard, which imposes very low energy consumption. Moreover, this new neighbour- hood meets almost all the criteria of a sustainable neigh- bourhood, following the references published by the Uni- versity of Liege and other international Organizations [28, 29]. The site is strongly served by public transport linking it to the centre of Liege, thanks to the proximity of the university. The neighbourhood has a built density of 40 dwellings per hectare. Outdoor spaces are landscaped with more than 30% "green" or "blue" surfaces and separate water management for rainwater and wastewater. Rainwa- ter recovery systems and tanks are also implemented.

In this research, only the neighbourhood residential part was studied. The environmental impacts calculated to corre- spond to the functional unit "residential eco-district of 3.5 ha comprising 1 ha of roads, driveways and parking lots, 17,800 m2 of green space, 19,740 m2 of floor space, housing around 219 people, studied on a life cycle of 100 years.

## Design of the same eco‑neighbourhood in other countries

As it was explained before, the same eco-neighbourhood was simulated in 149 capitals located in 149 countries. The choice of the capital, for representing each country was not random. Indeed, in most of these countries, the capital was considered as the most populated regions of the country, with the highest pollution rate and waste products.

In this sense, four parameters were simultaneously applied for adapting this neighbourhood in each country such as: the energy mix of each country, the local climate of each country, building materials of each country and occupant mobility.

The information on the energy mix and electricity mix, was obtained from the International Energy Agency [30] and the Energy Information System of each country. With the Pleiades software, it was possible to freely select the different energy components mix (in %) or electricity mix (in %) such as: Nuclear, fuel, coal, gas and renew- able energy. More details of Pleaides software are shown in Izuba Energy Web site (<https://www.izuba.fr/>). At the same time, the information on the local climate of each country was evaluated with the most recent Meteonorm software version. Meteonorm was defined as a meteoro- logical database with climatological data for every loca- tion on the globe [31]. The fixed database in Meteonorm

* + 1. contains approximately 6200 cities, 8,325 weather stations, and 1200 Design Reference Year sites.

The information on the construction material was evalu- ated on the basis of 2018–2020 standard thermal regu- lation of each country, but also from information issue to the UN-habitat, and some literature reviews (for some Africa and Asia countries, without recent building stand- ards). Regarding inhabitant mobility, the data were freely selected on Pleaides ACV software. These data are pre- sented as follows;

* Type of site: Suburbs
* Occupants commuting daily: 80% in developed countries (USA, Japan, Germany, France, UK, etc.) and 50% in developing countries (Cameroon, Madagascar, Haiti, Thailand, etc.).
* The distance of the weekly commute between home and trade (1000 m);
* Distance from the public transport network (500 m),
* Distance from the daily commute to work (5000– 10,000 m).
* Presence of bike path: yes;
* Public transportation: bus, subway and tram.

Finally, it was supposed that there is no war in any country, such as Libya, Syria, Mali, Niger etc. because, at the time of war, the behaviour of the population varied anytime.

## Environmental database and studied indicators

The environmental data used comes from the ECOIN- VENT database developed by different research institutes based in Switzerland. These data include, for each process and material, a life cycle inventory that contains all mate- rial and energy flows into and out of the system [32]. The software version 2.2 (2012) of the ECOINVENT database was employed and complemented by the latest version, Eco invent 3.5 [33]. In this sense, it is interesting to highlight that the development of this database follows processes that have been certified several times as reliable and the contents of this database have been verified and validated by inter- national experts. The ECOINVENT Centre is recognized as an international leader in environmental sustainability data and it is well known for the transparency of its methods (Eco invent [33]).

Environmental impacts are possible adverse effects caused by a development, industrial, or infrastructural pro- ject or by the release of a substance into the environment. Some of the major environmental issues that are causing immense concern are environmental pollution, air pollution, water pollution, garbage pollution, noise pollution, deforest- ation, resource depletion, climate change, etc. In this sense, this study is centred on only one environmental impact: waste products [34–36] due to the impact of waste on the environment, like air pollution, affect health. For instance, three million people die each year from air pollution, either 5% of annual global deaths, according to the recent report of the World Health Organization (WHO). At the same time, air pollution is also responsible for allergies and respiratory diseases and the emission of waste generates the production of CO2 which accelerates the global warming of the Earth.

Table 1 Wall composition

| Element | Component | e(cm) | ρ\*e(kg/m2) | λ (w/m.k) | R(m2.K/W) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Coated exterior wall | Exterior coating | 1.5 | 26.0 | 1.150 | 0.01 |
|  | Expanded polystyrene | 32.0 | 8.0 | 0.032 | 10.0 |
|  | Limestone silico block | 15.0 | 270.0 | 0.136 | 1.10 |
|  | Ceiling | 1.3 | 11.0 | 0.325 | 0.04 |
| Barded outer wall | Cement fiber cladding | 2.0 | 36.0 | 0.950 | 0.02 |
|  | Air blade | 1.2 | 0.0 | 0.080 | 0.15 |
|  | Polyurethane | 24.0 | 7.0 | 0.025 | 9.60 |
|  | Limestone silico block | 15.0 | 27.0 | 0.136 | 1.10 |
|  | Ceiling | 1.3 | 11.0 | 0.325 | 0.04 |
| High floor | PDM sealing | – | – | – | – |
|  | Polyurethane | 40.0 | 12 | 0.025 | 16.00 |
|  | Concrete slab | 25.0 | 325 | 1.389 | 0.18 |
|  | Ceiling | 1.3 | 11 | 0.325 | 0.04 |
| Intermediate floor | Chappe + coating | 8.0 | 144 | 0.700 | 0.11 |
|  | Polyurethane | 1.0 | 0 | 0.030 | 0.33 |
|  | Aerated concrete | 8.0 | 48 | 0.210 | 0.38 |
|  | Concrete slab | 25.0 | 325 | 1.389 | 0.18 |
|  | Ceiling | 1.3 | 11 | 0.325 | 0.04 |
| Low floor | Chappe + coating | 8.0 | 144 | 0.700 | 0.11 |
|  | polyurethane | 25.0 | 8 | 0.025 | 10.00 |
|  | Concrete slab | 25.0 | 575 | 1.750 | 0.14 |
| Internal wall | Ceiling | 1.3 | 11 | 0.325 | 0.04 |
|  | Limestone silico block | 15.0 | 270 | 0.136 | 1.1 |
|  | Expanded polystyrene | 4.0 | 1 | 0.032 | 1.25 |
|  | Limestone silico block | 15.0 | 270 | 0.136 | 1.10 |
|  | Ceiling | 1.3 | 11 | 0.325 | 0.04 |

Thickness (e),the mass per unit area (ρ\*e),thermal conductivity (λ) and thermal resistance (R)

## LCA simulation software

In this study, all the new IZUBA energy software resources were combined. Indeed, the interface of the most recent ver- sion (Pleiades ACV software, version 4.19.1.0), is divided into 6 modules: Library, Modeller (called ALCYONE for the old software version), BIM, Editor (called COMFIE-PLEI- ADES), Results, and ACV (nova-EQUER). It is important to notice that each one has a precise function and that all of them are regularly used by numerous international research laboratories and have been validated by the scientific com- munity [37–39].

Modeller or ALCYONE software is a graphical input tool. It allows the description of the geometry of a build- ing, to represent its solar masks and to define the composi- tion of the walls. It is also via this software that we define the zoning of the building where the thermal behaviour is homogeneous [39]. This software is essentially made up of five components: Generals (Construction Data, the Project Library, LCA Association, Weather and Horizon); Plan; 3D and Calculation. Finally, some physical characteristics of the study neighbourhood are shown in Table 1 as modelling. Editor or COMFIE-PLEIADES software allows to define the performance of dynamic thermal simulation for build- ings [38, 39]. The geometry created via “Modeller” can be imported from the information entered concerning the mate- rials, the occupation scenarios and the meteorological data. Finally, the software evaluates the heating and air condition- ing needs and it is possible to disaggregate the results by

thermal zone or by a period of time.

ACV module or nova-EQUER is the environmental qual- ity assessment tool. The requirements calculated in “Editor “are exported and additional inputs are provided to com- plete the LCA. It includes data such as the energy mix, the mobility of users, the constitution of outdoor spaces and networks for example. The software then performs the LCA of the buildings and neighbourhood and presents results in the form of radars compiling the different impacts with the possibility of visualizing the part of each phase of the life cycle and comparing different variants of the same project [38]. This module is essentially made up:

* + - 1. Building/neighbourhood data

The original data comes from the Pleiades, this thermal/ACV coupling allows to automatically recover all the characteristics of the building, data about the structure of the building and the elements involved in thermal calculations and the needs and/ or energy consumption.

These data are then supplemented with specific LCA data like: all elements that are not part of the thermal study, general and administrative data con- cerning the current operation and the building or neighbourhood and the specific or adjusted seizures for energy, water, waste and transport.

* + - 1. Software organization

The Pleaides interface is structured around five axes and the input data was defined for this particular case study as:

1. Axe1: environmental impact data libraries and gen- eral calculation characteristics. In this research it were fixed: surplus of materials at the site 5%, default typical service life of families of element: interior and exte- rior doors 30 years, global equipment 20 years, glazing 30 years, coating 10 years; the distance of transport: site of production towards building site 100 km, site towards inert discharge finally of life: 20 km.
2. Axe2: Project management with structure data for any type of project and use of the building with the EQUER engine. In particular, in this research it were fixed these values: Loss of electrical network from 9 to 40% according to country; water system yield: 80%, hot water consumption 40 l/day/person; cold water consumption 100 l/day/person; a selective collection of glass: yes; sorted glass: 90%; incinerated waste 40%; recovery to incineration: yes; substituted energy: gas or fuel oil (depending on the country); recovery yield: 80%; selective collection of paper: yes; sorted paper: 80%; distance from the site to the garbage dump: 20 km; distance from the site to the incinerator: 10 km and distance from the site to the recycling centre: 100 km.
3. Axe3: Specific seizures PEBN E + C-
4. Axe4: Start the calculations and consult the results.
5. Axe5: Neighbourhood Management.

## The waste scale

The scales used in this study were detailed in Table 2. In this sense, several studies in the literature recommend that, when LCA is applied as a decision-making tool for a specific geographic region, the functional unit is chosen as the total waste produced in this region in a given time (i.e., in a year). In this research, the functional unit is the total annual and per capita amount of waste generated by this eco-district in each region. Finally, it is interesting to highlight that, according to Eriksson et al., the system boundaries must account for time, space and the functional unit chosen as a basis of comparison.

## Mitigation of impacts

In this study, one scenario to study the mitigation potential of one sustainable strategy on the calculated environmental impact was applied. This strategy consisted of applying pho- tovoltaic panels combined with inhabitant mobility.

In the initial scenario, all the electricity used to come from the electricity grid of every country, and the produc- tion impacts were taken into account. This new configuration will have a photovoltaic system on all the roofs on the site. Installed photovoltaic panels cover a total area of 580 m2, equivalent to a peak power of 82,857.14 W. It must be noted that the selected homes use electricity only for light and to power household appliances. What is more, the selected installation will consist of mono crystalline photovoltaic solar panels with sensors placed using support on the roof terrace. For the countries located in the temperate zone the photovoltaic panels (PV) were oriented at 37° towards the southern hemisphere, whereas, for the countries located in the hot zone, the PV were inclined at 45° towards northern hemisphere. This procedure, will let us to have an optimal inclination in all the countries. After this, it was performed the thermal simulation of each building, and completed the final LCA of the neighbourhood.

Finally, it let us look at the impact of mobility on the neighbourhood’s environmental record. It is interesting to highlight that, in the basic scenario, it was considered a significant use of the car for daily commuting. This sce- nario will be compared with a second one, where the site is considered urban, perfectly integrated with public transport networks and at a short distance from the shops of primary needs. These are the mobility hypotheses employed in this study:

Table 2 The scales used in this study

Intensity Meaning

0–100 Low

100–200 Slightly low

200–300 important

300–400 Slightly high

400–500 high



Fig. 1 Waste product assessment generated by an eco-neighbourhood designed in 150 countries

Fig. 2 Waste product evaluation generated by an eco- neighbour- hood designed in some regions

350



300

Waste products (t)

250

200

150

100

50

0



* 1. Initial scenario: Eighty per cent of the occupants commute daily, the distance from home to work on 5–20 km is carried out daily by car and the distance from home to shops of 1–5 km is done weekly by car.
  2. New scenario or" Urban Site" scenario: One hundred per cent (100%) of the occupants make the trip daily, the distance from home to work on 2–5 km is done daily by bus and the distance from home to shops of 0.5-1 km is carried out weekly by bike or on foot.

Finally, both scenarios have been combined for obtaining a mixed scenario affecting more significant on the three envi- ronmental impact assessment.

This scenario was mainly applied to the case of 31 representative countries, selected among the 150 studied countries. These selected countries are located in the 5 continents, covering the three climatic zones and were also selected on the base of their very significant energy mix and local building materials. Results and discussions

This section is divided into four sub-sections. The first one section analysis the waste products in the different countries, the second section analysis the influence of new scenario on the waste products, the third section analysis the different waste product components and the fourth section analysis the different life cycle phases and the waste products per occupant in each region.

## Analysis of the waste products

Figures 1 and 2, show the waste product assessment com- ing from a green-neighbourhood designed in 150 countries and some regions of the world every year. In Fig. 1, it can be observed that the waste products are “High (between 400 and 500tons/year)”, in Kazakhstan. The waste prod- ucts are “Slightly high (300-400tons/year), in China, India, Poland, Nigeria, Somalia, Botswana, and Mozambique. These, are “important (200-300tons/year)”, in USA, Japan, Madagascar, Peru, Nicaragua, Libya, Cambodia, France, etc. Moreover, the waste products are “Slightly low (100- 200tons/year)”, in Canada, Russia, Australia, Cameroon, and Mongolia; but, “low (0-100tons/year)”, in some coun- tries such as: Mali, Kenya, Ireland etc. In consequence, it can be deduced that the countries having important fossil energy, produce the most waste products. That is the case of China and Kazakhstan where the 63.7% of the energy mix are constituted of coal (IES, 2016). Indeed, during the extraction, transportation, processing and storage of oil, such as coal, there is a release of large quantities of waste into the environment. At the same time, some countries that produce nuclear energy, such as France (42% of energy mix) and Belgium (48%) in 2016 (IES, 2016), emit a great number of waste products. Despite this, it is Poland one of the world countries producing a large amount of waste. This result is not surprising, given that its energy mix consisted of 56.5% coal and 27.0% of oil in 2016.

In Fig. 2, it can be observed that the average waste prod- uct emission is 283.7tons/year in the countries located in North Africa, 214.3tons/year in North Europe and 262.3tons/year in North America. These results showed that the waste products are more significant in North Africa than in North Europe. Although fossil fuels are more widely used in Northern Europe countries, the percentage of this fossil energy in the energy mix used is lower in Northern Europe than in North Africa.

The majority of countries located in North Africa are oil producers. Indeed, oil extraction processes generate a sig- nificant amount of waste that can harm human health. Also, it is seen that the waste products are more important in South Asia (304.2tons/year) than in South Africa (297.2tons/year) and more important in South America (232.4tons/year) than in south Europe (228.9tons/year). It is interesting to notice that waste products are 13% more significant in Africa than in Europe. So, at the scale of the neighbourhood, the average waste products are the highest in Asia countries and the least in Europe countries.

The Europe countries are among the most polluters in the world. However, many conventions are adopted within Europe to reduce the pollution rate, as the package (40%, 27%, 27%), fixed in 2014. Despite this, Africa and Asia remain highly dependent on fossil fuels. In addition to this, large quantities of industrial waste are released by the devel- oped countries on the Asian and African maritime coasts. These highly polluting degradations affect the health of the population and destroy the ecosystem.

## Analysis of scenario impacts

As shown in Fig. 3, the introduction of a photovoltaic panel allows to increase up to12% of total waste products. Over- all the waste products varied according to the continent,

Fig. 3 Comparative Diagram of the waste product impacts of the "Initial" and "Photovoltaic" Sce- narios (Functional Unit: Entire neighbourhood) over 100 years

Table 3 The waste products in some countries per living area

Country Initial LCA of waste prod- ucts (kg/m2) LCA of waste product after apply- ingPV scenario (kg/m2) Comments

France 30 40 Increase to 33%

Germany 30 30 Stable

Spain 30 30 Stable

Italy 30 30 Stable

UK 30 40 Increase to 33%

Canada 40 40 Stable

USA 30 30 Stable

Brazil 30 30 Stable

China 40 50 Increase to25%

Russia 30 30 Stable

India 10 50 Increase to 400%

Cameroon 40 40 Stable

Madagascar 40 50 Increase to25%

Ethiopia 40 50 Increase to25%

Australia 40 40 Stable

Japan 10 50 Increase to 400%

Average 32.25 39.38 Increase to 26%

indeed, these increases to 6.5%, 4.7% and 22.1% in Europe, America and Asia, respectively. Applied Photovoltaic panel, increase up to 16.7% and 11.2% of waste products in Africa and Oceanic. These results showed that the influence of the new scenario is more significant in the countries located in Asia and Africa than other continents (Europe, Oceanic and America).

The waste products also varied according to the countries, for example: an increase of 12.3% in Australia; 14.4% in the UK and France; 17.9% in China; 30.1% in Madagascar; 31.4% in Iran; 32.3% in the USA and 34.0% in Singapore. The countries as Russia, Belgium and the UK generate a low waste quantity by using gas as one of the main heat- ing sources. These results show that the photovoltaic panel generated an important waste quantity. In this sense, Bilimo- ria and Defrenne [40] affirmed that the waste rate increases with applying photovoltaic panel. Overall, more than 90% of photovoltaic waste in Europe is emitted by the following countries: Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, Slovakia and the United Kingdom. In consequence, the mix of nuclear and renewable energies is essential to reduce the share of fossil fuels (coal in mind) in the majority of world electric- ity production.

In 2018, while coal (and other fossil fuels) is the most widely used sources of electricity production in the world, the development of low-carbon energies (nuclear and renew- able energies) is indispensable and unavoidable.

While panels contain small amounts of valuable materials such as silver, they are mostly made of glass, an extremely low-value material… In addition, some governments may classify solar panels as hazardous waste, due to the small amounts of heavy metals (cadmium, lead, etc.) they con- tain. Solar panels are composed of photovoltaic (PV) cells that convert sunlight to electricity. When these panels enter landfills, valuable resources go to waste. And because solar panels contain toxic materials like lead that can leach out as they break down, landfilling also creates new Wastes. Table 3 shows the waste products by living area.

From this table it can be observed an increase of up to 26%, per living area, applying the PV scenario. The average waste concentration is estimated to be from 32.25 kg/m2.year in an eco-neighbourhood. These results seem to be smaller than those found in some research. It is normal and very logical that it is smaller than those of neighbourhoods with more conventional habitats because this study takes place in an eco-neighbourhood. Indeed, the construction materials are over 70% recycled.

## Analysis of waste sources

Figure 4 shows the frequency of some waste sources. The different waste components in the 30 representative coun- tries in the 150 countries are: transport and heating (0.8%); electricity (6.3%); domestic waste (21.6%); water (8.2%); building material (58.4%) and equipment (2.5%). So, domes- tic wastes and building materials are the main sources of waste products. In an eco-neighbourhood, daily mobility and building heating have the least influence on the waste quantity. In Europe, the building material wastes were esti- mated to be 72.1% in Spain, 68.6% in Italy, and 70.5% in Belgium. In America, this one was estimated at 68.1% in Brazil, 66.3% in the USA, and 64.7% in Canada. However,

Fig. 4 Percentage of the differ- ent environmental components in the generation of the waste products, for some representa- tive countries located in the seven (07) climate types of the world

Iceland

Nigeria

Cameroon

Madagascar South Africa

Qatar

Iran

Singapore

Indonesia

India Mexico

Brazil

Fiji

New-Zealand

Australia

Japan

China

Chile

Argentina

Canada

USA

Spain

Ruissia United Kingdom

Italy

France

Belgium Germany

0

Other Heating Transport Equipment Material Electricity

Domestic Waste

waste Water

50

Waste products (%)

100

150

Col d zo ne

Hot Zone

Fig. 5 Waste product concentra- 50



Construction

Operation

maintenance

dismantling

tion generated by each phase of 45

life cycle at the eco-neighbour-

Waste product(%)

40

hood scale designed in some

regions 35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

in Asia, they were off 43.3% in China and India, then 48.7% in Japan. Finally, in Africa, the building material wastes were off 42.7% in South Africa, 58.1% in Nigeria, 54.1% in Cameroon, and 50.4% in Madagascar. It is very important to notice that: in the cold zone (Iceland and Greenland), the heating building, and electricity produce 4.0 and 2.9% of waste products, respectively. In the warm zone (Madagascar, Brazil, Nigeria, Singapore, Iran etc.), electricity and water produce 6.5% and 7.3% of waste, respectively. While in tem- perate zones (USA, Canada, France, China, Germany, etc.), this one produces 7.2% and 9.1% of the wastes, respectively. The analysis of these results shows that electricity produces the most waste in the temperate zone. Nevertheless, the heat- ing building generated the most important waste quantity in the “Cold zone”. In the temperate zone, some countries as France and Belgium depend enormously on nuclear electricity.

Temperate zone

Nuclear energy has many advantages: it is stable, low pol- luting and predictable. The waste emission rate is reduced between 10 and 25% by replacing virgin or non-recycla- ble building materials with recycled ones. In addition, an increase in the waste recycling rate, up to 80%, can reduce CO2 emissions by up to 30%. These results are almost simi- lar to those found by Parkes et al. [41].

## Analysis of different phases

Figure 5 shows the waste products concentration gener- ated by the different phases. In the 150 countries, it can be observed that the 24.4% of total waste are produced during the construction of the neighbourhood; 31.2%, during the operation phase; 9.1%, during the renovation phase; and 35.3% of waste during the demolition of the neighbour- hood. These results show that the dismantling phase of the neighbourhood is the most significant. In Europe, the con- struction and operation phases represent 27.7% and 25.3% of total waste generated, respectively; while the renovation and demolition represent 7.7%, and 39.4%, respectively. In Africa, the construction and use phases generated 21.1% and 36.8% of the wastes, respectively, while the renovation and demolition represent 10.1%, and 31.8% of waste, respec- tively. Also, in the America countries, the construction and operation phases represent 27.2%, and 23.6% of total waste, while the renovation and dismantling generated 10.5% and 38.7% of this one, respectively. Finally, in Asia, the con- struction phase represents 21.6% of total waste, the utiliza- tion phase 38.9%, the renovation phase 9.1% and the demoli- tion phase 35.3%.

On one hand, these previous results show that the con- struction and demolition phases generated more waste in Europe than in the three other continents. At the same time, the Operation phase produces the more important waste quantity in the countries located in Asia, than, these of three other continents (Africa, Europe and America). Finally, the renovation phase produces the most wastes in America and Africa.

On the other hand, in Fig. 6 it can be observed that, in the 150 countries, the average of waste products is of 402 kg/ inhabitant/year and that the total waste quantity generated by the occupant is expected to be 5.22 tons in 2030 and 13.25tons in 2050. The waste products generated per inhab- itant per year for the countries located in European are over the average of the world. While these ones are under the average of the world for the countries located in Africa and Asia continents. The wastage rate produced by an inhabit- ant is estimated to be around 435 kg per year in Europe and around 358 kg per year in Africa.

We also can see that the waste emission rate per inhabit- ant per year is over of the average world in China, USA, Madagascar and Canada, but, under of the average world, in Germany, Senegal and Australia.

The European Environment Agency [42, 43] reported that the waste rate sent by an inhabitant from a conventional or standard neighbourhood was estimated to be around 450 kg

Fig. 6 Waste products generated 16



Waste products per inhabitant(t)

by each occupant living in eco-

14

neighbourhood on two periods

(presently and future) 12

10

8

6

4

2

0

2030 2050 Currently



per year in Europe. The results found in this research are almost 10% lower than those ones. So, the waste products are lower in the sustainable neighbourhood than in the con- ventional neighbourhood. To move towards the "zero waste" goal it is important to avoid what can become or produce wastes.

# Conclusions

This research focuses on the life cycle assessment of waste products of an eco-neighbourhood initially located in Bel- gium. The same neighbourhood was simulated in 149 other countries by respecting some parameters own at each coun- try such as the use of different materials, the heating/cool- ing systems, the energy mix, the buildings insulation thick- nesses, mobility and the climate-related to the temperatures. It was found that the energy mix, own in each country has the most significant effect on the waste products. Indeed, countries heavily dependent on fossil fuels (petroleum, coal etc.) emit more waste from the exploitation, transport, stor- age and processing of these energy sources. Some countries such as China, Poland and the majority of African countries have a high concentration of waste. This is not surprising given that these countries are still more than 80% dependent on fossil fuels. The dismantling phase of the neighbourhood produces the most significant quantity of waste. During this building phase, most of the building materials are broken, and useless, they can only serve as waste.

The huge quantities of waste regularly produced by

humans and released into the environment contribute to environmental pollution by destroying flora and fauna. Nature is unable to bear all the pressure of human reacts symmetrically on different forms with the birth of floods, drought, tornado, cyclone etc. For this, recycling makes it possible to recover all this waste. The waste concentration does not vary in the same way with the introduction of the photovoltaic panels in each of the world regions. Those ones increase the most of waste rate in African countries. In fact, in Africa, most photovoltaic panels are very poorly maintained.

Sustainable neighbourhoods can be recommended as a model of the neighbourhood with a low wastage rate when they are compared to the more conventional neighbourhood. In all regions of the world, new neighbourhoods must be more ecological and adapted to the new climate. To limit the polluting waste emitted during the building demolition phase, future buildings must be constructed with recyclable materials. To reduce daily waste it is recommended to limit packaging, put waste in the right place to properly sort it, to use compost, to limit the use of batteries and to reduce paperwork. Finally, another future study will focus on the analysis of waste on the health of the inhabitants at the neighbourhood scale.

Author Contributions Conceptualization, MKN and JAO; Methodol- ogy, MKN; Software, MKN; Validation, MKN and SG; Formal analy- sis, MKN; Investigation, SG; Resources, MKN and JAO; Data cura- tion, MKN; Writing-original draft preparation, MKN, SG and JAO; Writing-review and editing, MKN, SG; Visualization, MKN; Supervi- sion, JAO. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Funding This research received no external funding.

Data Availability The data that support this research and other findings of this paper are available from the corresponding author upon reason- able request of each reader.

Code Availability No code applicable.

## Declarations

Conflict of interest The authors declare no competing interests.

# References

1. Agence Européenne pour l’Environnement (AEE): Consomma- tion des ménages (2015). https://www.eea.europa.eu/fr/themes/ households/intro. Accessed Feb 2021.
2. Najih, A., Habbari, K., Amir, S., Agbalou, A.: Management of domestic waste in the cityof khouribga (morocco): study of the behavior of the citizen. Science LibEditions Mersenne 6 (2016)
3. Mickaël, D.: Représentations sociales du tri sélectifet des déchetsenfonction des pratiques de tri. Les cahiers internation- aux de psychologiesociale 2(98), 173–209 (2013).
4. Dominique L.: Le secteur des déchets aux Etat-Unis. Flux 1(43), 73–84 (2001)
5. Nematchoua, M.K., Reiter S.: Life cycle assessment of an eco- neighborhood: influence of a sustainable urban mobility and photovoltaic panels. In: IAPE '19, Oxford (2019).
6. Wang, L., et al.: A life cycle assessment (LCA) comparison of three management options for waste papers: bioethanol produc- tion, recycling and incineration with energy recovery. Biores. Technol. 120, 89–98 (2012)
7. Stoessel, F., et al.: Life cycle inventory and carbon and water foodprint of fruits and vegetables: application to a Swiss retailer. Environ. Sci. Technol. 46, 3253–3262 (2012)
8. Jörg, W., Bernd, B.: Comparative evaluation of life cycle assess- ment models for solid waste management. Waste Manag. 27, 1021–1031 (2007)
9. HLPE: Pertes et gaspillages de nourrituredans un contexte de systèmesalimentaires durables. Rapport du Grouped’experts de haut niveau sur la sécuritéalimentaireet la nutrition du Comité de la sécuritéalimentairemondiale, Rome (2014).
10. Foteinis, S.: Life cycle assessment of organic versus conven- tional agriculture. A case study of lettuce cultivation in Greece. J. Clean. Prod. 112, 2462–2471 (2015)
11. ADEME: Optimisation de la gestion des déchets municipaux –Comment évaluer les impacts environnementaux au moyen de l’analyse du cycle de vie (2005). www.ademe.fr. Accessed Feb 2021.
12. IBGE: Plan déchets—plan de préventionet de gestion des déchets, Bruxelles (2010).
13. FAO: Solutions d’emballagealimentaireadaptées aux pays endéveloppement, Rome (2014).
14. Ghinea, C., Petraru, M., Simion, I.M., Sobariu, D., Hans, Th., Bressers, A., Gavrilescu, M.: Life cycle assessment of waste management and recycled paper systems. Environ. Eng. Manag. J. 13(8), 2073–2085 (2014)
15. Producer Responsibility Group (PRG): The PRG plan, real value from packaging waste (1994).
16. Anon.: Landfill Tax. Environmental News Release. Department of Environment, London (1995).
17. Mona, S., Schneider, G., Boucher, J.: Etat de la pratique des analyses de cycle de vie (acv) oubilansenvironnementaux- globauxdans les activites de gestion des dechets. Record 09-1018/1A, 1(65) (2011).
18. Rodríguez, J., Iglesias, E., Marañón, L., Castrillón, P., RiestraH., Sastre,: Life cycle analysis of municipal solid waste manage-ment possibilities in Asturias, Spain. Waste Manag. Res. 21, 1–14 (2003)
19. Finnveden, G.: Methodological aspects of life cycle assessment of integrated solid waste management systems. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 26, 173–187 (1999)
20. Cherubini, F., Bargigli, S., Ulgiati, S.: Life cycle assessment (LCA) of waste management strategies: landfilling, sorting plant and incineration. Energy 34, 2116–2123 (2009)
21. Blengini, G.A., Fantoni, M., Busto, M., Genon, G., Zanetti, M.C.: Participatory approach, acceptability and transparency of waste management LCAs: case studies of Torino and Cuneo. Waste Manag. 32, 1712–1721 (2012)
22. Hong, R.J., Wang, G.F., Guo, R.Z., Cheng C.X., Liu Q., Zhang P.J., Qian G.R.: Life cycle assessment of BMT-based integrated municipal solid waste management: case study in Pudong, China. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 49, 129–146 (2006)
23. Yay, A.: Application of life cycle assessment (LCA) for munici- pal solid waste management: a case study of Sakarya. J. Clean. Prod. 94, 284–293 (2015)
24. Doaemo, W., Dhiman, S., Borovskis, A., Wenlan, Z., Sumedha, B., Jaipuria, S., Betasolo, M.: Assessment of municipal solid waste management system in Lae City, Papua New Guinea in the context of sustainable development. Environ. Dev. Sustain. 23, 18509–18539 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/ s10668-021-01465-2
25. Baquero, M., Cifrian, E., Pérez-Gandarillas, L. Andrés, A.: Methodology proposed for estimating biowaste generation using municipal rurality indexes. Waste Biomass Valoriz. 13, 941–954 (2022). <https://doi.org/10.1007/s12649-021-01571-2>
26. Roy, T.K., Ekram, K.M.M., Hossain, M.T., Sahriar, M.R.: Assessment of solid waste management as an eco‐neighbour- hood component. In: 1st International Conference on Urban and Regional Planning, Bangladesh Bangladesh Institute of Plan- ners. On 01 April 2020, 3 (12) (2020).
27. Colangelo, F., Petrillo, A., Farina, I.: Comparative environ- mental evaluation of recycled aggregates from construction and demolition wastes in Italy. Sci. Total Environ. 798(1), 149250 (2021)
28. Teller, J., Marique, A.F., Loiseau, V., Godard, F., Delbar, C.: Réfé- rentiel quartiers durables (Guides méthodologiques), Namur, Bel- gique, SPW, DGO4 (2014).
29. Riera Perez, M.G., Rey, E.: A multi-criteria approach to compare urban renewal scenarios for an existing neighborhood. Case study in Lausanne (Switzerland). Build. Environ. 65, 58–70 (2013)
30. International Energy Statistics (IES): https://www.eia.gov/beta/ inter national/data/browser/#/?pa=00000000100000000000 00000000000000000000000000000000000000u&c=ruvvvvvfvt vnvv1urvvvvfvvvvvvfvvvou20evvvvvvvvvnvvuvo&ct=0&vs= INTL.44–2-BLR-QBTU.A&ord=CR&vo=0&v=H&end=2016. Accessed Feb 2021.
31. Remund, J., Müller, S., Kunz, S, Huguenin, B., Studer, C., Cattin, R.: Global Meteorological Database Version 7 Software and Data for Engineers, Planers and Education. METEOTESTFabrikstrasse 14 CH-3012 Bern Switzerland, 1–17 (2017).www.meteotest.com, www.meteonorm.com. Accessed Feb 2021.
32. Peuportier, B., Popovici, E., Troccmé, M.: Analyse du cycle de vie à l’échelle du quartier, bilanet perspectives du projet ADEQUA. Build. Environ. 2013(03), 017 (2006)
33. Ecoinvent: LCI database (2018). https://simapro.com/databases/ ecoinvent/?gclid=CjwKCAjwsdfZBRAkEiwAh2z65sg-fOlOp NksILo. Accessed Feb 2021.
34. Goedkoop, M., Spriensma, R.: TheEco indicator 99: a damage oriented method for lifecycle impact assessment. 142 (2000).
35. Guinée, J.B., Gorréeb, M., Heijungs, R., Huppes, G.: Lyfe cycle assessment: an operational guide to the ISI Standard, P704 (2001).
36. Byron, A.: Ellis. Life Cycle Cost 2–8 (2007). See Barringer’s free LCC Excel file at <http://www.barringer1.com/lcc.xls>. Accessed Feb 2021.
37. Salomon, T., Mikolasek, R., Peuportier, B.: Outil de simulation thermique du bâtiment, COMFIE, from *Journée SFT-IBPSA, Outils de simulation thermo-aéraulique du bâtiment*, La Rochelle (2005)
38. Nocker L., Debacker, W.: VITO. Annex: Monetisation of the MMG method. 1–65 (2018).
39. Colombert, M., De Chastenet, C., Diab, Y., Gobin, C., Herfray, G., Jarrin, T., Trocmé, M.: Analyse de cycle de vie à l’échelle du quartier: unoutild’aide à la décision? Le cas de la ZAC Claude Bernard à Paris (France). Urban Environ. 5, c1–c21 (2011)
40. Bilimoria S., Defrenne, N.: The evolution of photovoltaic waste in Europe. CERES 1(22) (2013).
41. Parkes, O., Lettieri, P., David, I., Bogle, L.: Life cycle assess- ment of integrated waste management systems for alternative legacy scenarios of the London Olympic Park. Waste Manag. 40, 157–166 (2015)
42. Parlament Europeen (EP): Déchets: de nouveaux objectifseuro- péens pour augmenter le recyclage (2017). http://www.europ arl.europa.eu/news/fr/headlines/society/201703 06STO65256/ dechets-de-nouveaux-objectifs-europeens-pour-augmenter-le- recyclage. Accessed Feb 2021.
43. Nematchoua, M.K., MahsanSadeghi, S.R.: Strategies and sce- narios to reduce energy consumption and CO2 emission in the urban, rural and sustainable neighbourhoods. Sustain. Cities Soc. 72, 103053 (2021). <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2021.103053>