A Review of Biotic Interactions and Taxon Names Found in globalbioticinteractions/carvalheiro2023

by Nomer and Elton, two naive review bots

review@globalbioticinteractions.org

https://globalbioticinteractions.org/contribute

https://github.com/globalbioticinteractions/carvalheiro2023/issues

2024-01-18

Abstract

Life on earth is sustained by complex interactions between organisms and their environment. These biotic interactions can be captured in datasets and published digitally. We describe a review process of such an openly accessible digital interaction datasets of known origin, and discuss their outcome. The dataset under review (aka globalbioticinteractions/carvalheiro2023) has size 327KiB and contains 542 interactions with 1 (e.g., flowersVisitedBy) unique types of associations between 63 primary taxa (e.g., Scabiosa columbaria) and 171 associated taxa (e.g., Bombus pascuorum). The report includes detailed summaries of interactions data as well as a taxonomic review from multiple perspectives.

Table of Contents

# Introduction

## Data Review

Data review can be a time consuming process, especially when done manually. This review report aims to help facilitate data review of species interaction claims made in datasets registered with Global Biotic Interactions (Poelen, Simons, and Mungall 2014). The review includes summary statistics of, and observations about, the dataset under review:

WorldFAIR pilot data from: VisitationData\_Luisa\_Carvalheiro. file:///home/runner/work/carvalheiro2023/carvalheiro2023/./

For additional metadata related to this dataset, please visit <https://github.com/globalbioticinteractions/carvalheiro2023> and inspect associated metadata files including, but not limited to, *README.md*, *eml.xml*, and/or *globi.json*.

# Methods

The review is performed through programmatic scripts that leverage tools like Preston, Elton, Nomer combined with third-party tools like grep, mlr, tail and head.

Tools used in this review process

| tool name | version |
| --- | --- |
| elton | 0.13.2 |
| nomer | 0.5.6 |
| mlr | 6.0.0 |
| pandoc | 3.1.6.1 |

The review process can be described in the form of the script below [1].

# get versioned copy of the dataset (size approx. 327KiB) under review
elton pull globalbioticinteractions/carvalheiro2023

# generate review notes
elton review globalbioticinteractions/carvalheiro2023\
 > review.tsv

# export indexed interaction records
elton interactions globalbioticinteractions/carvalheiro2023\
 > interactions.tsv

# export names and align them with the Catalogue of Life using Nomer
elton names globalbioticinteractions/carvalheiro2023\
 | nomer append col\
 > name-alignment.tsv

or visually, in a process diagram.



Review Process Overview

You can find a recent copy of the full review script at check-data.sh.

# Results

In the following sections, the results of the review are summarized [2]. Then, links to the detailed review reports are provided.

## Biotic Interactions



Biotic Interaction Data Model

In this review, biotic interactions (or biotic associations) are modeled as a primary (aka subject, source) organism interacting with an associate (aka object, target) organism. The dataset under review classified the primary/associate organisms with specific taxa. The primary and associate organisms The kind of interaction is documented as an interaction type.

The dataset under review (aka globalbioticinteractions/carvalheiro2023) has size 327KiB and contains 542 interactions with 1 (e.g., flowersVisitedBy) unique types of associations between 63 primary taxa (e.g., Scabiosa columbaria) and 171 associated taxa (e.g., Bombus pascuorum).

An exhaustive list of indexed interaction claims can be found in csv and tsv archives. To facilitate discovery, the first 500 claims available on the html page at <indexed-interactions.html> are shown below.

The exhaustive list was used to create the following data summaries below.

Sample of Indexed Interaction Claims

| sourceTaxonName | interactionTypeName | targetTaxonName | referenceCitation |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Pilosella oficinarum | flowersVisitedBy | Andrena | https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/u/1/d/1cJ0qX9ppqHoSyqFykwYJef-DFOzoutthBXjwKRY81T8/export?format=tsv&gid=776329546 |
| Mycelis muralis | flowersVisitedBy | Baccha | https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/u/1/d/1cJ0qX9ppqHoSyqFykwYJef-DFOzoutthBXjwKRY81T8/export?format=tsv&gid=776329546 |
| Apiaceae | flowersVisitedBy | Bombus | https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/u/1/d/1cJ0qX9ppqHoSyqFykwYJef-DFOzoutthBXjwKRY81T8/export?format=tsv&gid=776329546 |
| Origanum vulgare | flowersVisitedBy | Bombus | https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/u/1/d/1cJ0qX9ppqHoSyqFykwYJef-DFOzoutthBXjwKRY81T8/export?format=tsv&gid=776329546 |

Most Frequently Mentioned Interaction Types (up to 20 most frequent)

| interactionTypeName | count |
| --- | --- |
| flowersVisitedBy | 685 |

Most Frequently Mentioned Primary Taxa (up to 20 most frequent)

| sourceTaxonName | count |
| --- | --- |
| Scabiosa columbaria | 44 |
| Solidago virgaurea | 39 |
| Rubus fructicosus | 36 |
| Helianthemum nummularium | 32 |
| Geranium robertianum | 32 |
| Senecio | 32 |
| Crepis | 30 |
| Centranthus ruber | 26 |
| Clematis vitalba | 24 |
| Hieracium | 23 |
| Origanum vulgare | 22 |
| Achillea millefolium | 22 |
| Pilosella oficinarum | 20 |
| Torilis japonica | 15 |
| Cotoneaster franchetti | 14 |
| Hypericum perforatum | 13 |
| Ligustrum vulgare | 13 |
| Lactuca serriola | 12 |
| Eupatorium cannabinum | 11 |

Most Frequently Mentioned Associate Taxa (up to 20 most frequent)

| targetTaxonName | count |
| --- | --- |
| Bombus pascuorum | 64 |
| Episyrphus balteatus | 25 |
| Lasioglossum morio | 22 |
| Formica fusca | 21 |
| Meligethes solidus | 20 |
| Diptera | 17 |
| Syrphus ribesii | 17 |
| Heteroptera | 16 |
| Lasius alienus | 15 |
| Platycheirus albimanus | 14 |
| Hymenoptera | 13 |
| Halictus tumulorum | 13 |
| Anaspis pulicaria | 12 |
| Meligethes aeneus | 10 |
| Oedemera lurida | 10 |
| Paragus haemorrhous | 10 |
| Sphaerophoria scripta | 10 |
| Coleoptera | 9 |
| Thysanoptera | 9 |

Most Frequent Interactions between Primary and Associate Taxa (up to 20 most frequent)

| sourceTaxonName | interactionTypeName | targetTaxonName | count |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Geranium robertianum | flowersVisitedBy | Bombus pascuorum | 6 |
| Scabiosa columbaria | flowersVisitedBy | Bombus pascuorum | 5 |
| Solidago virgaurea | flowersVisitedBy | Bombus pascuorum | 5 |
| Teucrium scorodonia | flowersVisitedBy | Bombus pascuorum | 5 |
| Clinopodium ascendens | flowersVisitedBy | Bombus pascuorum | 4 |
| Lotus corniculatus | flowersVisitedBy | Bombus pascuorum | 4 |
| Origanum vulgare | flowersVisitedBy | Bombus pascuorum | 4 |
| Rubus fructicosus | flowersVisitedBy | Bombus pascuorum | 4 |
| Achillea millefolium | flowersVisitedBy | Heteroptera | 3 |
| Centranthus ruber | flowersVisitedBy | Homoptera | 3 |
| Solidago virgaurea | flowersVisitedBy | Sarcophaga | 3 |
| Rubus fructicosus | flowersVisitedBy | Anaspis pulicaria | 3 |
| Clematis vitalba | flowersVisitedBy | Episyrphus balteatus | 3 |
| Geranium robertianum | flowersVisitedBy | Episyrphus balteatus | 3 |
| Scabiosa columbaria | flowersVisitedBy | Episyrphus balteatus | 3 |
| Scabiosa columbaria | flowersVisitedBy | Eristalis tenax | 3 |
| Cotoneaster franchetti | flowersVisitedBy | Formica fusca | 3 |
| Clematis vitalba | flowersVisitedBy | Lasioglossum morio | 3 |
| Origanum vulgare | flowersVisitedBy | Lasioglossum morio | 3 |

### Interaction Networks

The figures below provide a graph view on the dataset under review. The first shows a summary network on the kingdom level, and the second shows how interactions on the family level. Note that both network graphs were first aligned taxonomically via the Catalogue of Life. Please refer to the original (or verbatim) taxonomic names for a more original view on the interaction data.



Interactions on taxonomic kingdom rank as interpreted by the Catalogue of Life download svg



Interactions on the taxonomic family rank as interpreted by the Catalogue of Life. download svg

You can download the indexed dataset under review at <indexed-interactions.csv>. A tab-separated file can be found at <indexed-interactions.tsv>

Learn more about the structure of this download at GloBI website, by opening a GitHub issue, or by sending an email.

Another way to discover the dataset under review is by searching for it on the GloBI website.

## Taxonomic Alignment

As part of the review, all names are aligned against various name catalogs (e.g., col ncbi discoverlife gbif itis globi mdd tpt pbdb). These alignments may serve as a way to review name usage or aid in selecting of a suitable taxonomic name resource to use.

Sample of Name Alignments

| providedName | relationName | resolvedCatalogName | resolvedName |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Achillea millefolium | SYNONYM\_OF | col | Achillea aspleniifolia |
| Achillea millefolium | HAS\_ACCEPTED\_NAME | col | Achillea millefolium |
| Achillea millefolium | SAME\_AS | ncbi | Achillea millefolium |
| Achillea millefolium | NONE | discoverlife | Achillea millefolium |

Distribution of Taxonomic Ranks of Aligned Names by Catalog. Names that were not aligned with a catalog are counted as NAs. So, the total number of unaligned names for a catalog will be listed in their NA row.

| resolvedCatalogName | resolvedRank | count |
| --- | --- | --- |
| tpt | NA | 233 |
| tpt | species | 1 |
| pbdb | NA | 197 |
| pbdb | genus | 17 |
| pbdb | family | 9 |
| pbdb | order | 5 |
| pbdb | species | 3 |
| pbdb | suborder | 2 |
| pbdb | subfamily | 1 |
| pbdb | infraorder | 1 |
| ncbi | species | 156 |
| ncbi | NA | 36 |
| ncbi | genus | 22 |
| ncbi | family | 9 |
| ncbi | subgenus | 6 |
| ncbi | order | 5 |
| ncbi | subspecies | 2 |
| ncbi | suborder | 2 |
| ncbi | subfamily | 1 |
| mdd | NA | 234 |
| itis | NA | 103 |
| itis | species | 94 |
| itis | genus | 19 |
| itis | family | 9 |
| itis | order | 5 |
| itis | suborder | 2 |
| itis | subspecies | 1 |
| itis | subfamily | 1 |
| globi | species | 161 |
| globi | NA | 159 |
| globi | genus | 50 |
| globi | family | 9 |
| globi | subspecies | 7 |
| globi | order | 5 |
| globi | subgenus | 4 |
| globi | suborder | 2 |
| globi | subfamily | 1 |
| globi | infraorder | 1 |
| gbif | species | 161 |
| gbif | NA | 32 |
| gbif | genus | 30 |
| gbif | family | 9 |
| gbif | subspecies | 7 |
| gbif | order | 5 |
| discoverlife | NA | 213 |
| discoverlife | species | 21 |
| col | species | 134 |
| col | NA | 61 |
| col | genus | 22 |
| col | family | 9 |
| col | subspecies | 6 |
| col | order | 5 |
| col | subfamily | 1 |

Name relationship types per catalog. Name relationship type “NONE” means that a name was not recognized by the associated catalog. “SAME\_AS” indicates either a “HAS\_ACCEPTED\_NAME” or “SYNONYM\_OF” name relationship type. We recognize that “SYNONYM\_OF” encompasses many types of nomenclatural synonymies (ICZN 1999) (e.g., junior synonym, senior synonyms).

| resolvedCatalogName | relationName | count |
| --- | --- | --- |
| col | SYNONYM\_OF | 42 |
| col | HAS\_ACCEPTED\_NAME | 165 |
| col | NONE | 61 |
| discoverlife | NONE | 213 |
| discoverlife | HAS\_ACCEPTED\_NAME | 21 |
| discoverlife | HOMONYM\_OF | 2 |
| discoverlife | SYNONYM\_OF | 5 |
| gbif | HAS\_ACCEPTED\_NAME | 230 |
| gbif | SYNONYM\_OF | 72 |
| gbif | NONE | 32 |
| globi | SAME\_AS | 2719 |
| globi | NONE | 21 |
| itis | HAS\_ACCEPTED\_NAME | 128 |
| itis | NONE | 103 |
| itis | SYNONYM\_OF | 5 |
| mdd | NONE | 234 |
| ncbi | SAME\_AS | 189 |
| ncbi | SYNONYM\_OF | 14 |
| ncbi | NONE | 36 |
| pbdb | NONE | 197 |
| pbdb | HAS\_ACCEPTED\_NAME | 39 |
| tpt | NONE | 233 |
| tpt | SYNONYM\_OF | 1 |

List of Available Name Alignment Reports

| catalog name | alignment results |
| --- | --- |
| col | associated names alignments (first 500, full csv/tsv) |
| ncbi | associated names alignments (first 500, full csv/tsv) |
| discoverlife | associated names alignments (first 500, full csv/tsv) |
| gbif | associated names alignments (first 500, full csv/tsv) |
| itis | associated names alignments (first 500, full csv/tsv) |
| globi | associated names alignments (first 500, full csv/tsv) |
| mdd | associated names alignments (first 500, full csv/tsv) |
| tpt | associated names alignments (first 500, full csv/tsv) |
| pbdb | associated names alignments (first 500, full csv/tsv) |

## Additional Reviews

Elton, Nomer, and other tools may have difficulties interpreting existing species interaction datasets. Or, they may misbehave, or otherwise show unexpected behavior. As part of the review process, detailed review notes are kept that document possibly misbehaving, or confused, review bots. An sample of review notes associated with this review can be found below.

First few lines in the review notes.

| reviewDate | reviewCommentType | reviewComment |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 2024-01-18T22:46:08Z | summary | file:///home/runner/work/carvalheiro2023/carvalheiro2023/./ |
| 2024-01-18T22:46:08Z | summary | 685 interaction(s) |
| 2024-01-18T22:46:08Z | summary | 0 note(s) |
| 2024-01-18T22:46:08Z | summary | 685 info(s) |

In addtion, you can find the most frequently occurring notes in the table below.

: Most frequently occurring review notes, if any.

For addition information on review notes, please have a look at the first 500 Review Notes or the download full csv or tsv archives.

## GloBI Review Badge

As part of the review, a review badge is generated. This review badge can be included in webpages to indicate the review status of the dataset under review.



Sample of a GloBI Review Badge [3]

Note that if the badge is green, no review notes were generated. If the badge is yellow, the review bots may need some help with interpreting the species interaction data.

## GloBI Index Badge

If the dataset under review has been registered with GloBI, and has been succesfully indexed by GloBI, the GloBI Index Status Badge will turn green. This means that the dataset under review was indexed by GloBI and is available through GloBI services and derived data products.

Sample of a GloBI Index Badge [4]

If you’d like to keep track of reviews or index status of the dataset under review, please visit GloBI’s dataset index [[5]](https://globalbioticinteractions.org/datasets) for badge examples.

# Discussion

This review is intended to provide a perspective on the dataset to aid understanding of species interaction claims discovered. However, this review should *not* be considered as fitness of use or other kind of quality assessment. Instead, the review may be used as in indication of the open-ness[6] and FAIRness (Wilkinson et al. 2016; Trekels et al. 2023) of the dataset: in order to perform this review, the data was likely openly available, **F**indable, **A**ccessible, **I**nteroperable and **R**eusable. Currently, this Open-FAIR assessment is qualitative, and with measurement units specified, a more quantitative approach can be implemented.

# Acknowledgements

We thank the many humans that created us and those who created and maintained the data, software and other intellectual resources that were used for producing this review. In addition, we are grateful for the natural resources providing the basis for these human and bot activities.

# References

ICZN. 1999. “International Code of Zoological Nomenclature.” The International Trust for Zoological Nomenclature, London, UK. <https://www.iczn.org/the-code/the-code-online/>.

Poelen, Jorrit H., James D. Simons, and Chris J. Mungall. 2014. “Global Biotic Interactions: An Open Infrastructure to Share and Analyze Species-Interaction Datasets.” *Ecological Informatics* 24 (November): 148–59. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoinf.2014.08.005>.

Trekels, Maarten, Debora Pignatari Drucker, José Augusto Salim, Jeff Ollerton, Jorrit Poelen, Filipi Miranda Soares, Max Rünzel, Muo Kasina, Quentin Groom, and Mariano Devoto. 2023. “WorldFAIR Project (D10.1) Agriculture-related pollinator data standards use cases report.” Zenodo. <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8176978>.

Wilkinson, Mark D., Michel Dumontier, IJsbrand Jan Aalbersberg, Gabrielle Appleton, Myles Axton, Arie Baak, Niklas Blomberg, et al. 2016. “The FAIR Guiding Principles for Scientific Data Management and Stewardship.” *Scientific Data* 3 (1). <https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2016.18>.

1. Note that you have to first get the data (e.g., via elton pull globalbioticinteractions/carvalheiro2023) before being able to generate reviews (e.g., elton review globalbioticinteractions/carvalheiro2023), extract interaction claims (e.g., elton interactions globalbioticinteractions/carvalheiro2023), or list taxonomic names (e.g., elton names globalbioticinteractions/carvalheiro2023) ↑
2. Disclaimer: The results in this review should be considered friendly, yet naive, notes from an unsophisticated robot. Please keep that in mind when considering the review results. ↑
3. Up-to-date status of the GloBI Review Badge can be retrieved from the GloBI Review Depot ↑
4. Up-to-date status of the GloBI Index Badge can be retrieved from GloBI’s API ↑
5. At time of writing (2024-01-18) the version of the GloBI dataset index was available at https://globalbioticinteractions.org/datasets ↑
6. According to http://opendefinition.org/: “Open data is data that can be freely used, re-used and redistributed by anyone - subject only, at most, to the requirement to attribute and sharealike.” ↑